24

Contents

28 Networking
29 Java Persistence API (JPA)
30 JavaServer™ Faces Web Apps: Part 1
31 JavaServer™ Faces Web Apps: Part 2
32 REST-Based Web Services
33 (Optional) ATM Case Study, Part 1:
Object-Oriented Design with the UML

34 (Optional) ATM Case Study, Part 2:
Implementing an Object-Oriented Design

35 Swing GUI Components: Part 2
36 Java Module System and Other Java 9 Features
F Using the Java API Documentation
G Creating Documentation with javadoc
H Unicode®
I Formatted Output
J Number Systems
K Bit Manipulation
L Labeled break and continue Statements
M UML 2: Additional Diagram Types
N Design Patterns

Foreword
Throughout my career I’ve met and interviewed many expert Java developers who’ve
learned from Paul and Harvey, through one or more of their college textbooks, professional books, videos and corporate training. Many Java User Groups have joined together
around the Deitels’ publications, which are used internationally in university courses and
professional training programs. You are joining an elite group.

How do I become an expert Java developer?
This is one of the most common questions I receive at talks for university students and at
events with Java professionals. Students want to become expert developers—and this is a
great time to be one.
The market is wide open, full of opportunities and fascinating projects, especially for
those who take the time to learn, practice and master software development. The world
needs good, focused expert developers.
So, how do you do it? First, let’s be clear: Software development is hard. But do not
be discouraged. Mastering it opens the door to great opportunities. Accept that it’s hard,
embrace the complexity, enjoy the ride. There are no limits to how much you can expand
your skills.
Software development is an amazing skill. It can take you anywhere. You can work in
any field. From nonprofits making the world a better place, to bleeding-edge biological
technologies. From the frenetic daily run of the financial world to the deep mysteries of
religion. From sports to music to acting. Everything has software. The success or failure of
initiatives everywhere will depend on developers’ knowledge and skills.
The push for you to get the relevant skills is what makes Java How to Program, 11/e so
compelling. Written for students and new developers, it’s easy to follow. It’s written by
authors who are educators and developers, with input over the years from some of the
world’s leading academics and professional Java experts—Java Champions, open-source
Java developers, even creators of Java itself. Their collective knowledge and experience will
guide you. Even seasoned Java professionals will learn and grow their expertise with the
wisdom in these pages.
How can this book help you become an expert?
Java was released in 1995—Paul and Harvey had the first edition of Java How to Program
ready for Fall 1996 classes. Since that groundbreaking book, they’ve produced ten more
editions, keeping current with the latest developments and idioms in the Java softwareengineering community. You hold in your hands the map that will enable you to rapidly
develop your Java skills.
The Deitels have broken down the humongous Java world into well-defined, specific
goals. Put in your full attention, and consciously “beat” each chapter. You’ll soon find

26

Foreword

yourself moving nicely along your road to excellence. And with both Java 8 and Java 9 in
the same book, you’ll have up-to-date skills on the latest Java technologies.
Most importantly, this book is not just meant for you to read—it’s meant for you to
practice. Be it in the classroom or at home after work, experiment with the abundant
sample code and practice with the book’s extraordinarily rich and diverse collection of
exercises. Take the time to do all that is in here and you’ll be well on your way to achieving
a level of expertise that will challenge professional developers out there. After working with
Java for more than 20 years, I can tell you that this is not an exaggeration.
For example, one of my favorite chapters is Lambdas and Streams. The chapter covers
the topic in detail and the exercises shine—many real-world challenges that developers will
encounter every day and that will help you sharpen your skills. After solving these exercises, novices and experienced developers alike will deeply understand these important
Java features. And if you have a question, don’t be shy—the Deitels publish their email
address in every book they write to encourage interaction.
That’s also why I love the chapter about JShell—the new Java 9 tool that enables
interactive Java. JShell allows you to explore, discover and experiment with new concepts,
language features and APIs, make mistakes—accidentally and intentionally—and correct
them, and rapidly prototype new code. It may prove to be the most important tool for
leveraging your learning and productivity. Paul and Harvey give a full treatment of JShell
that both students and experienced developers will be able to put to use immediately.
I’m impressed with the care that the Deitels always take care to accommodate readers
at all levels. They ease you into difficult concepts and deal with the challenges that professionals will encounter in industry projects.
There’s lots of information about Java 9, the important new Java release. You can
jump right in and learn the latest Java features. If you’re still working with Java 8, you can
ease into Java 9 at your own pace—be sure to begin with the extraordinary JShell coverage.
Another example is the amazing coverage of JavaFX—Java’s latest GUI, graphics and
multimedia capabilities. JavaFX is the recommended toolkit for new projects. But if you’ll
be working on legacy projects that use the older Swing API, those chapters are still available to you.
Make sure to dig in on Paul and Harvey’s treatment of concurrency. They explain the
basic concepts so clearly that the intermediate and advanced examples and discussions will
be easy to master. You will be ready to maximize your applications’ performance in an
increasingly multi-core world.
I encourage you to participate in the worldwide Java community. There are many
helpful folks out there who stand ready to help you. Ask questions, get answers and answer
your peers’ questions. Along with this book, the Internet and the academic and professional communities will help speed you on your way to becoming an expert Java developer.
I wish you success!
Bruno Sousa
bruno@javaman.com.br

Java Champion
Java Specialist at ToolsCloud
President of SouJava (the Brazilian Java Society)
SouJava representative at the Java Community Process

Preface
Welcome to the Java programming language and Java How to Program, Early Objects,
Eleventh Edition! This book presents leading-edge computing technologies for students,
instructors and software developers. It’s appropriate for introductory academic and professional course sequences based on the curriculum recommendations of the ACM and the
IEEE professional societies,1 and for Advanced Placement (AP) Computer Science exam
preparation.2 It also will help you prepare for most topics covered by the following Oracle
Java Standard Edition 8 (Java SE 8) Certifications:3
•

Oracle Certified Associate, Java SE 8 Programmer

•

Oracle Certified Professional, Java SE 8 Programmer

Our primary goal is to prepare college students to meet the Java programming challenges they’ll encounter in upper-level courses and in industry. We focus on software engineering best practices. At the heart of the book is the Deitel signature live-code
approach—we present most concepts in the context of hundreds of complete working
programs that have been tested on Windows®, macOS® and Linux®. The complete code
examples are accompanied by live sample executions.

New and Updated Features
In the following sections, we discuss the key features and updates we’ve made for Java How
to Program, 11/e, including:
•

Flexibility Using Java SE 8 or the New Java SE 9 (which includes Java SE 8)

•

Java How to Program, 11/e’s Modular Organization

•

Introduction and Programming Fundamentals

•

Flexible Coverage of Java SE 9: JShell, the Module System and Other Java SE 9
Topics

•

Object-Oriented Programming

1.

Computer Science Curricula 2013 Curriculum Guidelines for Undergraduate Degree Programs in Computer Science, December 20, 2013, The Joint Task Force on Computing Curricula, Association for
Computing Machinery (ACM), IEEE Computer Society.

2.
3.

https://apstudent.collegeboard.org/apcourse/ap-computer-science-a/exam-practice
http://bit.ly/OracleJavaSE8Certification (At the time of this writing, the Java SE 9 certifica-

tion exams were not yet available.)

28

Preface
•

Flexible JavaFX/Swing GUI, Graphics and Multimedia Coverage

•

Data Structures and Generic Collections

•

Flexible Lambdas and Streams Coverage

•

Concurrency and Multi-Core Performance

•

Database: JDBC and JPA

•

Web-Application Development and Web Services

•

Optional Online Object-Oriented Design Case Study

Flexibility Using Java SE 8 or the New Java SE 9
To meet the needs of our diverse audiences, we designed the book for college and professional courses based on Java SE 8 or Java SE 9, which from this point forward we’ll refer
to as Java 8 and Java 9, respectively. Each feature first introduced in Java 8 or Java 9 is
accompanied by an 8 or 9 icon in the margin, like those to the left of this paragraph. The
new Java 9 capabilities are covered in clearly marked, easy-to-include-or-omit chapters and
sections—some in the print book and some online. Figures 1 and 2 list some key Java 8
and Java 9 features that we cover, respectively.
Java 8 features
Lambdas and streams
Type-inference improvements
@FunctionalInterface annotation
Bulk data operations for Java Collections—
filter, map and reduce
Library enhancements to support lambdas (e.g.,
java.util.stream, java.util.function)

Date & Time API (java.time)
Parallel array sorting
Java concurrency API improvements
static and default methods in interfaces
Functional interfaces that define only one
abstract method and can include static
and default methods

Fig. 1 | Some key features we cover that were introduced in Java 8.
Java 9 features
In the Print Book
New JShell chapter
_ is no longer allowed as an identifier
private interface methods
Effectively final variables can be used in trywith-resources statements
Mention of the Stack Walking API
Mention of JEP 254, Compact Strings
Collection factory methods

On the Companion Website
Module system
HTML5 Javadoc enhancements
Matcher class’s new method overloads
CompletableFuture enhancements
JavaFX 9 skin APIs and other enhancements
Mentions of:
Overview of Java 9 security enhancements
G1 garbage collector
Object serialization security enhancements
Enhanced deprecation

Fig. 2 | Some key new features we cover that were introduced in Java 9.

Java How to Program, 11/e’s Modular Organization

29

Java How to Program, 11/e’s Modular Organization1
The book’s modular organization helps instructors plan their syllabi.
Java How to Program, 11/e, is appropriate for programming courses at various levels.
Chapters 1–25 are popular in core CS 1 and CS 2 courses and introductory course
sequences in related disciplines—these chapters appear in the print book. Chapters 26–36
are intended for advanced courses and are located on the book’s Companion Website.

Part 1: Introduction
Chapter 1, Introduction to Computers, the Internet and Java
Chapter 2, Introduction to Java Applications; Input/Output and Operators
Chapter 3, Introduction to Classes, Objects, Methods and Strings
Chapter 25, Introduction to JShell: Java 9’s REPL for Interactive Java

Part 2: Additional Programming Fundamentals
Chapter 4, Control Statements: Part 1; Assignment, ++ and -- Operators
Chapter 5, Control Statements: Part 2; Logical Operators
Chapter 6, Methods: A Deeper Look
Chapter 7, Arrays and ArrayLists
Chapter 14, Strings, Characters and Regular Expressions
Chapter 15, Files, Input/Output Streams, NIO and XML Serialization

Part 3: Object-Oriented Programming
Chapter 8, Classes and Objects: A Deeper Look
Chapter 9, Object-Oriented Programming: Inheritance
Chapter 10, Object-Oriented Programming: Polymorphism and Interfaces
Chapter 11, Exception Handling: A Deeper Look
Part 4: JavaFX Graphical User Interfaces, Graphics and Multimedia
Chapter 12, JavaFX Graphical User Interfaces: Part 1
Chapter 13, JavaFX GUI: Part 2
Chapter 22, JavaFX Graphics and Multimedia

Part 5: Data Structures, Generic Collections, Lambdas and Streams
Chapter 16, Generic Collections
Chapter 17, Lambdas and Streams
Chapter 18, Recursion
Chapter 19, Searching, Sorting and Big O
Chapter 20, Generic Classes and Methods: A Deeper Look
Chapter 21, Custom Generic Data Structures

1.

The online chapters and VideoNotes will be available on the book’s Companion Website before Fall
2017 classes and will be updated as Java 9 evolves. Please write to deitel@deitel.com if you need
them sooner.

30

Preface

Part 6: Concurrency; Networking
Chapter 23, Concurrency
Chapter 28, Networking

Part 7: Database-Driven Desktop Development
Chapter 24, Accessing Databases with JDBC
Chapter 29, Java Persistence API (JPA)

Part 8: Web App Development and Web Services
Chapter 30, JavaServer™ Faces Web Apps: Part 1
Chapter 31, JavaServer™ Faces Web Apps: Part 2
Chapter 32, REST Web Services
Part 9: Other Java 9 Topics
Chapter 36, Java Module System and Other Java 9 Features
Part 10: (Optional) Object-Oriented Design
Chapter 33, ATM Case Study, Part 1: Object-Oriented Design with the UML
Chapter 34, ATM Case Study Part 2: Implementing an Object-Oriented Design
Part 11: (Optional) Swing Graphical User Interfaces and Java 2D Graphics
Chapter 26, Swing GUI Components: Part 1
Chapter 27, Graphics and Java 2D
Chapter 35, Swing GUI Components: Part 2

Introduction and Programming Fundamentals (Parts 1 and 2)
Chapters 1 through 7 provide a friendly, example-driven treatment of traditional introductory programming topics. This book differs from most other Java textbooks in that it features
an early objects approach—see the section “Object-Oriented Programming” later in this
Preface. Note in the preceding outline that Part 1 includes the (optional) Chapter 25 on Java
9’s new JShell. It’s optional because not all courses will want to cover JShell. For those that
do, instructors and students will appreciate how JShell’s interactivity makes Java “come
alive,” leveraging the learning process—see the next section on JShell.

Flexible Coverage of Java 9: JShell, the Module System and Other
Java 9 Topics (JShell Begins in Part 1; the Rest is in Part 9)
JShell: Java 9’s REPL (Read-Eval-Print-Loop) for Interactive Java
JShell provides a friendly environment that enables you to quickly explore, discover and
experiment with Java’s language features and its extensive libraries. JShell replaces the tedious cycle of editing, compiling and executing with its read-evaluate-print-loop. Rather
than complete programs, you write JShell commands and Java code snippets. When you
enter a snippet, JShell immediately

Flexible Coverage of Java 9: JShell, the Module System and Other Java 9 Topics

31

• reads it,
• evaluates it and
• prints messages that help you see the effects of your code, then it
• loops to perform this process again for the next snippet.
As you work through Chapter 25’s scores of examples and exercises, you’ll see how
JShell and its instant feedback keep your attention, enhance your performance and speed
the learning and software development processes.
As a student you’ll find JShell easy and fun to use. It will help you learn Java features
faster and more deeply and will help you verify that these features work the way they’re
supposed to. As an instructor, you’ll appreciate how JShell encourages your students to dig
in, and that it leverages the learning process. As a professional you’ll appreciate how JShell
helps you rapidly prototype key code segments and how it helps you discover and experiment with new APIs.
We chose a modular approach with the JShell content packaged in Chapter 25. The
chapter:
1. is easy to include or omit.
2. is organized as a series of 16 sections, many of which are designed to be covered
after a specific earlier chapter of the book (Fig. 3).
3. offers rich coverage of JShell’s capabilities. It’s example-intensive—you should
do each of the examples. Get JShell into your fingertips. You’ll appreciate how
quickly and conveniently you can do things.
4. includes dozens of Self-Review Exercises, each with an answer. These exercises
can be done after you read Chapter 2 and Section 25.3. As you do each of them,
flip the page and check your answer. This will help you master the basics of JShell
quickly. Then as you do each of the examples in the remainder of the chapter
you’ll master the vast majority of JShell’s capabilities.
JShell discussions

Can be covered after

Section 25.3 introduces JShell, including starting a session,
executing statements, declaring variables, evaluating
expressions, JShell’s type-inference capabilities and more.

Chapter 2, Introduction to Java
Applications; Input/Output and
Operators

Section 25.4 discusses command-line input with Scanner
in JShell.
Section 25.5 discusses how to declare and use classes in
JShell, including how to load a Java source-code file
containing an existing class declaration.

Chapter 3, Introduction to Classes,
Objects, Methods and Strings

Section 25.6 shows how to use JShell’s auto-completion
capabilities to discover a class’s capabilities and JShell
commands.

Fig. 3 | Chapter 25 JShell discussions that are designed to be covered after specific earlier chapters. (Part 1 of 2.)

32

Preface

JShell discussions

Can be covered after

Section 25.7 presents additional JShell auto-completion
capabilities for experimentation and discovery, including viewing method parameters, documentation and
method overloads.

Chapter 6, Methods: A Deeper Look

Section 25.8 shows how to declare and use methods in
JShell, including forward referencing a method that
does not yet exist in the JShell session.
Section 25.9 shows how exceptions are handled in JShell.

Chapter 7, Arrays and ArrayLists

Section 25.10 shows how to add existing packages to the
classpath and import them for use in JShell.

Chapter 21, Custom Generic Data
Structures

The remaining JShell sections are reference material that can be covered after Section 25.10. Topics
include using an external editor, a summary of JShell commands, getting help in JShell, additional
features of /edit command, /reload command, /drop command, feedback modes, other JShell features configurable with /set, keyboard shortcuts for snippet editing, how JShell reinterprets Java for
interactive use and IDE JShell support.

Fig. 3 | Chapter 25 JShell discussions that are designed to be covered after specific earlier chapters. (Part 2 of 2.)
New Chapter—The Java Module System and Other Java 9 Topics
Because Java 9 was still under development when this book was published, we included an
online chapter on the book’s Companion Website that discusses Java 9’s module system
and various other Java 9 topics. This online content will be available before Fall 2017
courses.

Object-Oriented Programming (Part 3)
Object-oriented programming. We use an early objects approach, introducing the basic
concepts and terminology of object technology in Chapter 1. Students develop their first
customized classes and objects in Chapter 3. Presenting objects and classes early gets students “thinking about objects” immediately and mastering these concepts more thoroughly. [For courses that require a late-objects approach, you may want to consider our sister
book Java How to Program, Late Objects Version, 11/e.]
Early objects real-world case studies. The early classes and objects presentation in
Chapters 3–7 features Account, Student, AutoPolicy, Time, Employee, GradeBook and
Card shuffling-and-dealing case studies, gradually introducing deeper OO concepts.
Inheritance, Interfaces, Polymorphism and Composition. The deeper treatment of objectoriented programming in Chapters 8–10 features additional real-world case studies,
including class Time, an Employee class hierarchy, and a Payable interface implemented
in disparate Employee and Invoice classes. We explain the use of current idioms, such as
“programming to an interface not an implementation” and “preferring composition to
inheritance” in building industrial-strength applications.

Flexible JavaFX GUI, Graphics and Multimedia Coverage

33

Exception handling. We integrate basic exception handling beginning in Chapter 7 then
present a deeper treatment in Chapter 11. Exception handling is important for building
mission-critical and business-critical applications. To use a Java component, you need to
know not only how that component behaves when “things go well,” but also what exceptions that component “throws” when “things go poorly” and how your code should handle
those exceptions.
Class Arrays and ArrayList. Chapter 7 covers class Arrays—which contains methods for
performing common array manipulations—and class ArrayList—which implements a
dynamically resizable array-like data structure. This follows our philosophy of getting lots
of practice using existing classes while learning how to define your own. The chapter’s rich
selection of exercises includes a substantial project on building your own computer
through the technique of software simulation. Chapter 21 includes a follow-on project on
building your own compiler that can compile high-level language programs into machine
language code that will actually execute on your computer simulator. Students in first and
second programming courses enjoy these challenges.

Flexible JavaFX GUI, Graphics and Multimedia Coverage (Part 4)
and Optional Swing Coverage (Part 11)
For instructors teaching introductory courses, we provide a scalable JavaFX GUI, graphics
and multimedia treatment enabling instructors to choose the amount of JavaFX they
want to cover:
•

from none at all,

•

to some or all of the optional introductory sections at the ends of the early chapters,

•

to a deep treatment of JavaFX GUI, graphics and multimedia in Chapters 12, 13
and 22.

We also use JavaFX in several GUI-based examples in Chapter 23, Concurrency and
Chapter 24, Accessing Databases with JDBC.

Flexible Early Treatment of JavaFX
Students enjoy building applications with GUI, graphics, animations and videos. For
courses that gently introduce GUI and graphics early, we’ve integrated an optional GUI
and Graphics Case Study that introduces JavaFX-based graphical user interfaces (GUIs)
and Canvas-based graphics.1 The goal of this case study is to create a simple polymorphic
drawing application in which the user can select a shape to draw and the shape’s characteristics (such as its color, stroke thickness and whether it’s hollow or filled) then drag the
mouse to position and size the shape. The case study builds gradually toward that goal,
with the reader implementing a polymorphic drawing app in Chapter 10, and a more robust user interface in Exercise 13.9 (Fig. 4). For courses that include these optional early
case study sections, instructors can opt to cover none, some or all of the deeper treatment
in Chapters 12, 13 and 22 discussed in the next section.

1.

The deeper graphics treatment in Chapter 22 uses JavaFX shape types that can be added directly to
the GUI using Scene Builder.

34

Preface

Section or Exercise

What you’ll do

Section 3.6: A Simple GUI

Display text and an image.

Section 4.15: Event Handling
and Drawing Lines

In response to a Button click, draw lines using JavaFX
graphics capabilities.

Section 5.11: Drawing Rectangles and Ovals

Draw rectangles and ovals.

Section 6.13: Colors and Filled
Shapes

Draw filled shapes in multiple colors.

Section 7.17: Drawing Arcs

Draw a rainbow of colored arcs.

Section 8.16: Using Objects
with Graphics

Store shapes as objects then have those objects to draw
themselves on the screen.

Section 10.14: Drawing with
Polymorphism

Identify the similarities between shape classes and create
and use a shape class hierarchy.

Exercise 13.9: Interactive
Polymorphic Drawing
Application

A capstone exercise in which you’ll enable users to select each
shape to draw, configure its properties (such as color and
fill), and drag the mouse to position and size the shape.

Fig. 4 | GUI and Graphics Case Study sections and exercise.
Deeper Treatment of JavaFX GUI, Graphics and Multimedia in Chapters 12, 13 and 22
For this 11th edition, we’ve significantly updated our JavaFX presentation and moved all
three chapters into the print book, replacing our Swing GUI and graphics coverage (which
is now online for instructors who want to continue with Swing). In the case study and in
Chapters 12–13, we use JavaFX and Scene Builder—a drag-and-drop tool for creating
JavaFX GUIs quickly and conveniently—to build several apps demonstrating various JavaFX layouts, controls and event-handling capabilities. In Swing, drag-and-drop tools and
their generated code are IDE dependent. Scene Builder is a standalone tool that you can
use separately or with any of the Java IDEs to do portable drag-and-drop GUI design. In
Chapter 22, we present many JavaFX 2D and 3D graphics, animation and video capabilities. We also provide 36 programming exercises and projects that students will find challenging and entertaining, including many game-programming exercises. Despite the fact
that the JavaFX chapters are spread out in the book, Chapter 22 can be covered immediately after Chapter 13.
Swing GUI and Java 2D Graphics
Swing is still widely used, but Oracle will provide only minor updates going forward. For
instructors and readers who wish to continue using Swing, we’ve moved to the book’s Companion Website the 10th edition’s
• optional Swing GUI and Graphics Case Study from Chapters 3–8, 10 and 13
• Chapter 26, Swing GUI Components: Part 1
• Chapter 27, Graphics and Java 2D
• Chapter 35, Swing GUI Components: Part 2.
See the “Companion Website” section later in this Preface.

Data Structures and Generic Collections

35

Integrating Swing GUI Components in JavaFX GUIs
Even if you move to JavaFX, you still can use your favorite Swing capabilities. For
example, in Chapter 24, we demonstrate how to display database data in a Swing JTable
component that’s embedded in a JavaFX GUI via a JavaFX 8 SwingNode. As you explore
Java further, you’ll see that you also can incorporate JavaFX capabilities into your Swing
GUIs.

Data Structures and Generic Collections (Part 5)
Data structures presentation. Chapter 7 and the chapters of Part 5 form the core of a data
structures course. We begin with generic class ArrayList in Chapter 7. Our later data
structures discussions (Chapters 16–21) provide a deeper treatment of generic collections—showing how to use the built-in collections of the Java API.
We discuss recursion, which is important for many reasons including implementing
tree-like, data-structure classes. For computer-science majors and students in related disciplines, we discuss popular searching and sorting algorithms for manipulating the contents of collections, and provide a friendly introduction to Big O—a means of describing
mathematically how hard an algorithm might have to work to solve a problem. Most programmers should use the build-in searching and sorting capabilities of the collections
classes.
We then show how to implement generic methods and classes, and custom generic
data structures (this, too, is intended for computer-science majors—most programmers
should use the pre-built generic collections). Lambdas and streams (introduced in
Chapter 17) are especially useful for working with generic collections.

Flexible Lambdas and Streams Coverage (Chapter 17)
The most significant new features in Java 8 were lambdas and streams. This book has several
audiences, including
• those who’d like a significant treatment of lambdas and streams
• those who want a basic introduction with a few simple examples
• those who do not want to use lambdas and streams yet.
For this reason, we’ve placed most of the lambdas and streams treatment in Chapter 17,
which is architected as a series of easy-to-include-or-omit sections that are keyed to the book’s
earlier sections and chapters. We do integrate lambdas and streams into a few examples after
Chapter 17, because their capabilities are so compelling.
In Chapter 17, you’ll see that lambdas and streams can help you write programs faster,
more concisely, more simply, with fewer bugs and that are easier to parallelize (to realize
performance improvements on multi-core systems) than programs written with previous
techniques. You’ll see that “functional programming” with lambdas and streams complements object-oriented programming.
Many of Chapter 17’s sections are written so they can be covered earlier in the book
(Fig. 5)—we suggest that students begin by covering Sections 17.2–17.7 after Chapter 7
and that professionals begin by covering Sections 17.2–17.5 after Chapter 5. After reading
Chapter 17, you’ll be able to cleverly reimplement many examples throughout the book.

36

Preface

Lambdas and streams discussions

Can be covered after

Sections 17.2–17.5 introduce basic lambda and
streams capabilities that you can use to replace
counting loops, and discuss the mechanics of
how streams are processed.

Chapter 5, Control Statements: Part 2; Logical Operators

Section 17.6 introduces method references and
additional streams capabilities.

Chapter 6, Methods: A Deeper Look

Section 17.7 introduces streams capabilities that
process one-dimensional arrays.

Chapter 7, Arrays and ArrayLists

Sections 17.8–17.10 demonstrate additional
streams capabilities and present various functional interfaces used in streams processing.

Chapter 10, Object-Oriented Programming:
Polymorphism and Interfaces—
Section 10.10 introduces Java 8 interface
features (default methods, static
methods and the concept of functional
interfaces) for the functional interfaces
that support lambdas and streams.

Section 17.11 shows how to use lambdas and
streams to process collections of String
objects.

Chapter 14, Strings, Characters and Regular
Expressions

Section 17.12 shows how to use lambdas and
streams to process a List<Employee>.

Chapter 16, Generic Collections

Section 17.13 shows how to use lambdas and
streams to process lines of text from a file.

Chapter 15, Files, Input/Output Streams,
NIO and XML Serialization

Section 17.14 introduces streams of random values

All earlier Chapter 17 sections.

Section 17.15 introduces infinite streams

All earlier Chapter 17 sections.

Section 17.16 shows how to use lambdas to implement JavaFX event-listener interfaces.

Chapter 12, JavaFX Graphical User Interfaces: Part 1

Chapter 23, Concurrency, shows that programs using lambdas and streams are often easier to
parallelize so they can take advantage of multi-core architectures to enhance performance. The
chapter demonstrates parallel stream processing and shows that Arrays method parallelSort
improves performance on multi-core architectures when sorting large arrays.

Fig. 5 | Java 8 lambdas and streams discussions and examples.

Concurrency and Multi-Core Performance (Part 6)
We were privileged to have as a reviewer of Java How to Program, 10/e Brian Goetz, coauthor of Java Concurrency in Practice (Addison-Wesley). We updated Chapter 23, Concurrency, with Java 8 technology and idiom. We added a parallelSort vs. sort example
that uses the Java 8 Date/Time API to time each operation and demonstrate parallelSort’s better performance on a multi-core system. We included a Java 8 parallel vs. sequential stream processing example, again using the Date/Time API to show performance
improvements. We added a Java 8 CompletableFuture example that demonstrates se-

Database: JDBC and JPA

37

quential and parallel execution of long-running calculations and we discuss CompletableFuture enhancements in the online Java 9 chapter. Finally, we added several new

exercises, including one that demonstrates the problems with parallelizing Java 8 streams
that apply non-associative operations and several that have the reader investigate and use
the Fork/Join framework to parallelize recursive algorithms.
JavaFX concurrency. In this edition, we converted Chapter 23’s Swing-based GUI examples to JavaFX. We now use JavaFX concurrency features, including class Task to execute
long-running tasks in separate threads and display their results in the JavaFX application
thread, and the Platform class’s runLater method to schedule a Runnable for execution
in the JavaFX application thread.

Database: JDBC and JPA (Part 7)
JDBC. Chapter 24 covers the widely used JDBC and uses the Java DB database management system. The chapter introduces Structured Query Language (SQL) and features a
case study on developing a JavaFX database-driven address book that demonstrates prepared statements. In JDK 9, Oracle no longer bundles Java DB, which is simply an Oracle-branded version of Apache Derby. JDK 9 users can download and use Apache Derby
instead (https://db.apache.org/derby/).
Java Persistence API. Chapter 29 covers the newer Java Persistence API (JPA)—a standard for object relational mapping (ORM) that uses JDBC “under the hood.” ORM tools
can look at a database’s schema and generate a set of classes that enabled you to interact
with a database without having to use JDBC and SQL directly. This speeds database-application development, reduces errors and produces more portable code.

Web Application Development and Web Services (Part 8)
Java Server Faces (JSF). Chapters 30–31 introduce the JavaServer™ Faces (JSF) technology for building JSF web-based applications. Chapter 30 includes examples on building
web application GUIs, validating forms and session tracking. Chapter 31 discusses datadriven JSF applications—including a multi-tier web address book application that allows
users to add and search for contacts.
Web services. Chapter 32 now concentrates on creating and consuming REST-based web
services. Most of today’s web services use REST, which is simpler and more flexible than older web-services technologies that often required manipulating data in XML format. REST
can use a variety of formats, such as JSON, HTML, plain text, media files and XML.

Optional Online Object-Oriented Design Case Study (Part 10)
Developing an Object-Oriented Design and Java Implementation of an ATM. Chapters 33–
34 include an optional case study on object-oriented design using the UML (Unified Modeling Language™)—the industry-standard graphical language for modeling object-oriented
systems. We design and implement the software for a simple automated teller machine
(ATM). We analyze a typical requirements document that specifies the system to be built.
We determine the classes needed to implement that system, the attributes the classes need
to have, the behaviors the classes need to exhibit and specify how the classes must interact
with one another to meet the system requirements. From the design we produce a complete

38

Preface

Java implementation. Students often report having a “light-bulb moment”—the case study
helps them “tie it all together” and understand object orientation more deeply.

Teaching Approach
Java How to Program, 11/e, contains hundreds of complete working code examples. We
stress program clarity and concentrate on building well-engineered software.
Syntax Coloring. For readability, we syntax color all the Java code, similar to the way most
Java integrated-development environments and code editors syntax color code. Our syntax-coloring conventions are as follows:
comments appear in green
keywords appear in dark blue
errors appear in red
constants and literal values appear in light blue
all other code appears in black

Code Highlighting. We place transparent yellow rectangles around key code segments.
Using Fonts for Emphasis. We place the key terms and the index’s page reference for each
defining occurrence in bold maroon text for easier reference. We emphasize on-screen
components in the bold Helvetica font (e.g., the File menu) and emphasize Java program
text in the Lucida font (for example, int x = 5;).
Objectives. The list of chapter objectives provides a high-level overview of the chapter’s
contents.
Illustrations/Figures. Abundant tables, line drawings, UML diagrams, programs and program outputs are included.
Summary Bullets. We present a section-by-section bullet-list summary of the chapter. For
ease of reference, we generally include the page number of each key term’s defining occurrence in the text.
Self-Review Exercises and Answers. Extensive self-review exercises and answers are included for self study. All of the exercises in the optional ATM case study are fully solved.
Exercises. The chapter exercises include:
•

simple recall of important terminology and concepts

•

What’s wrong with this code?

•

What does this code do?

•

writing individual statements and small portions of methods and classes

•

writing complete methods, classes and programs

•

major projects

•

in many chapters, Making a Difference exercises that encourage you to use computers and the Internet to research and address significant social problems.

•

In this edition, we added new exercises to our game-programming set (SpotOn,
Horse Race, Cannon, 15 Puzzle, Hangman, Block Breaker, Snake and Word
Search), as well as others on the JavaMoney API, final instance variables, com-

Programming Wisdom

39

bining composition and inheritance, working with interfaces, drawing fractals,
recursively searching directories, visualizing sorting algorithms and implementing parallel recursive algorithms with the Fork/Join framework. Many of these require students to research additional Java features online and use them.
Exercises that focus on either Java 8 or Java 9 are marked as such. Check out our Programming Projects Resource Center for lots of additional exercise and project possibilities
(www.deitel.com/ProgrammingProjects/).
Index. We’ve included an extensive index. Defining occurrences of key terms are highlighted with a bold maroon page number. The print book index mentions only those
terms used in the print book. The online chapters index on the Companion Website includes all the print book terms and the online chapter terms.

Programming Wisdom
We include hundreds of programming tips to help you focus on important aspects of program development. These represent the best we’ve gleaned from a combined nine decades
of programming and teaching experience.

Good Programming Practices
The Good Programming Practices call attention to techniques that will help you produce programs that are clearer, more understandable and more maintainable.

Common Programming Errors
Pointing out these Common Programming Errors reduces the likelihood that you’ll
make them.

Error-Prevention Tips
These tips contain suggestions for exposing bugs and removing them from your programs;
many describe aspects of Java that prevent bugs from getting into programs in the first
place.

Performance Tips
These tips highlight opportunities for making your programs run faster or minimizing the
amount of memory that they occupy.

Portability Tips
The Portability Tips help you write code that will run on a variety of platforms.

Software Engineering Observations
The Software Engineering Observations highlight architectural and design issues that
affect the construction of software systems, especially large-scale systems.

Look-and-Feel Observations
The Look-and-Feel Observations highlight graphical-user-interface conventions. These
observations help you design attractive, user-friendly graphical user interfaces that conform to industry norms.

